 

# AODVv2 Draft Updates

This section lists the changes between AODVv2 revisions ...-13.txt and ...-14.txt.

* Moved Address Type TLV Value definitions to IANA section.
* Removed use of MAX_HOPCOUNT and [](#RFC5444) msg-hop-limit, msg-hop-count.
* Allow only one Unconfirmed route.
* Incorporated changes from Justin Dean's review, including removing, moving, extending and clarifying text.
* Extended Introduction.
* Clarified wording such as "recently sent", "the expected time", or "the expected RREP_Ack" or substituted it with instructions.
* Extended and reorganized Security Considerations.
* Updated text regarding message prioritization.
* Updated text regarding buffering.
* Added references to other sections where needed for clarity.
* Added RteMsg.AckReqAddr to the Multicast Route Message Table to check whether an RREP_Ack was expected.
* Renamed AODVv2_INTERFACES to InterfaceSet, extended its definition.
* Added Route Error Table to check for duplicate RERR messages.
* Turned SHOULDs into MUSTs where appropriate.
* Updated forwarding plane text.
* RREPs MUST be regenerated if CONTROL_TRAFFIC_LIMIT is not reached
* Explained why you'd want to keep routes with a lost sequence number
* Included interfaces in the Neighbor Table and next hop neighbor monitoring

<!--
This section lists the changes between AODVv2 revisions ...-12.txt
and ...-13.txt.

* Updated uses of host and node.
* Removed use of Data Element.
* Added explanation of self-healing issue of hop-by-hop acknowledgements.
* Moved appendix on relocation of routing prefix to a different router into the main draft.
* Added notes on forwarding plane to the Overview and added to text in the Applicability Statement.
* Separated AODVv2's Local Route Set from the Routing Information Base.
* Updated Adjacency Monitoring to Next Hop Monitoring.
* Added extra description in Multicast Route Message Table section.
* Added extra notes on possible implementations of Local Route Set.
* Added short description of reactive routing protocols to Applicability Statement.
* Added extra note in Applicability Statement about multiple IP addresses per router interface.
* Used clear references to Neighbor.State and LocalRoute.State.
* Added reference for text aboute buffering TCP packets.
* Updated text about Route.State to be clear which routes may be copied to a Routing Information Base.
* Added explanation of when a route discovery might not be attempted and action taken instead.
* Added text to explain that routes to prefixes are learned when prefix lengths are included in AODVv2 messages.
* Changed rule for adding new route if current routes to the same address have Route.State set to Unconfirmed.
* Changed text about reporting broken routes to use MUST instead of SHOULD.
* Updated message processing algorithms to refer to Neighbor Table updates.
* Added extra explanation for use of AckReq in RREP message.
* Added extra explanation for RREP_Ack handling.
* Removed references to MTU in RERR section and updated processing rules.
* Removed reference to RFC 6621.
* Removed appendix about multi-homing.
* Removed appendix containing pseudo-code.
* Minor editorial improvements.
-->

<!--
## Changes between revisions 11 and 12
 This section lists the changes between AODVv2 revisions ...-11.txt
and ...-12.txt.

* Avoided use of "node" and "subnet" where possible.
* Improved separation of data structure information from protocol operation.
* Updated uses of the terms "IP address" and "packet" to be clearer.
* More consistent and accurate use of MUST, SHOULD, SHOULD NOT, and MAY, and added explanations of consequences of not implementing SHOULDs.
* Used consistent references to [](#RFC5444).
* Updated title to include "Version 2".
* Updated Overview to state differences from AODV, text about loop freedom and RFC 7182 in Overview.
* Updated Terminology and removed the Data Element table. Gave clearer definition of Router Client and Unreachable Address. 
* Updated Applicability Statement to draw attention to requirements of the forwarding plane, handling of uni-directional
  links, usage of IP addresses on multiple interfaces, and description of gateway functionality.  Added note about penalty for not storing persistent state. 
* Updated Router Client section and added cost to Router Client entry.
* Clarified that Neighbor Table needs only information on neighboring routers on discovered routes. 
* Updated Sequence Number section. Use only one sequence number per router. Added description of sequence number comparison.
* Updated descriptions of route states.
* Improved clarity of Metrics section, generic metric instead of hopcount, removed default metric type, added explanation of LoopFree.
* Improved Initialization section.
* Major update to Adjacency Monitoring section. Made it clear that if bidirectional connectivity is already confirmed, requesting 
  acknowledgement is unnecessary. Separated Neighbor Table Updates into separate section.
* Updated description of message prioritization near the control message generation limit. 
* Updated wording regarding [](#RFC6621).
* Added description of backoff used for message retries.
* Improved description of how unidirectional links are handled.
* Improved text regarding creation of Unconfirmed route entries.
* Improved section on determining redundancy of received multicast messages.
* Added section on interactions with the forwarding plane.
* Improved Route State section. Clarified action when Active route expires. Separated information on expunging routes on memory constrained routers.
* Updated RERR description to be clearer about triggers.
* Updated IANA section to include only newly defined Messages and TLVs, and define an Unspecified value for AddressType.
* Updated references.
* Updated section on Gateway behaviour.
* Updated Appendix D to include more checks on msg_hop_limit and msg_hop_count.
* Renamed MAX_TIME to INFINITY_TIME to make meaning clearer.



## Changes between revisions 10 and 11
 This section lists the changes between AODVv2 revisions ...-10.txt
and ...-11.txt.

* Updated Simple Internet Attachment section to clarify behaviour of IAR for incoming RREQ messages.


## Changes between revisions 9 and 10
 This section lists the changes between AODVv2 revisions ...-09.txt
and ...-10.txt.

* Updated [](#RFC5444) Representation section to add "Address Type" TLV, which explicitly declares 
  the meaning of addresses in the [](#RFC5444) Address Block.
* Relocated route state definitions. Minor improvements to clarity throughout.
* Updated definition of timed routes.
* More consistent use of OrigPrefixLen, TargPrefixLen, and Invalid.
* Mandated use of neighbor adjacency checking and support of AckReq and RREP_Ack and clarified related text.
* Changed order of LoopFree checking and route cost comparisons in Evaluating Route Information.
* Updated structure of section on Applying Route Updates.
* Updated AckReq to include intended next hop address, and RREP to be multicast if intended next hop is not a 
  confirmed neighbor.
* Clarified that gateway router is not default router.  

## Changes between revisions 8 and 9
 This section lists the changes between AODVv2 revisions ...-08.txt
and ...-09.txt.

* Numerous editorial improvements were made, including relocation/removal/renaming/adding of some 
  sections and text, collection and tidying of scattered text on same topic, formatting made more 
  consistent to improve readability.
* Removed mentions of precursors from main text, except one mention in Route Table Entry.
* Removed use of MIN_METRIC which was not defined.
* Changed Current_Time to CurrentTime for consistency.
* Changed OrigAddrMetric and TargAddrMetric to OrigMetric and TargMetric respectively.
* Updated Overview to simplify and provide a broader summary.
* Updated Terminology definitions, Data Elements tables and combined sections.
* Updated Applicability Statement to move some of the non-applicability text and to simplify 
  what remains.
* Updated TLV names to conform to existing naming style.
* Updated Blacklist to be a NeighborList to include neighbors that have confirmed bidirectional 
  connectivity.
* Updated messages processed if router on blacklist and which are indicators of bidirectional links.
* Added RemoveTime to RteMsg Table section.
* Added short description of timed route to Route Table Entry section but removed Route.Timed 
  flag. Route is timed if its expiration time is not MAX_TIME.
* Added Unconfirmed route state for route to OrigAddr learned from RREQ.
* Updated AODVv2 Protocol Operations section and subsections, including Initialization, Adjacency 
  Monitoring, making algorithms easier to read and making notation consistent, general improvements 
  to the text.
* Updated Route Discovery, Retries and Buffering to include a more complete description of the route 
  discovery process.
* Updated wording relating to different metric types.
* Added text regarding control message limit in Message Transmission section.
* Added short explanation of positive/negative effects of buffering.
* Simplified the packet diagrams, since some of their contents was already explained in the 
  text below and then again as part of generation, reception and regeneration processes.
* Clarified some elements of the message content descriptions.
* Moved MetricType above MetricList in message sections, for consistency.
* Mirrored structure throughout AODVv2 Protocol Messages.
* Changed RREQ and RREP's use of Lists when only one entry is necessary.
* Added some pre-message-generation checks.
* Ensured consistency in regeneration (if msg-hop-limit is reduced to zero, do not regenerate).
* Removed statements about neighbors but added blacklist checks where necessary.
* Noted that RREQ retries SHOULD increase the SeqNum.
* Added statement that implementations SHOULD retry sending RREP.
* Added text explaining what happens if RREP is lost, regarding blacklisting and RREQ retries.
* Removed hop limit from RREP_Ack. Changed order of blacklist check.
* Updated RERR so that multiple metric types can be reported in the same message. 
* Updated RERR reception processing to ensure PktSource deletes the contained route.
* Added text to show that if a router is the destination of a RERR, the RERR is not regenerated.
* Added text that RERRs SHOULD NOT be created if the same RERR has recently been sent.
* Updated [](#RFC5444) overview and simplified/rearranged text in this section.
* Major update to [](#RFC5444) representation section
* Updated RERR's [](#RFC5444) representation so that PktSource is placed in Address Block, and updated 
  IANA section to make PktSource an Address Block TLV to indicate which address is PktSource.
* Described use of extension type in Metric TLV to represent MetricType, and the interpretation 
  when using the default metric type.
* Removed Multicast RREP as an optional feature.
* Updated Precursor Lists section to include options for precursor information to store.
* Updated Security Considerations.
 

## Changes between revisions 7 and 8
 This section lists the changes between AODVv2 revisions ...-07.txt
and ...-08.txt.

* MetricType is now an Address Block TLV. Minor changes to the text. By using an extension 
type in the Metric TLV we can represent MetricType more elegantly in the [](#RFC5444) message. 
* Updated Overview to be slightly more concise.
* Moved MetricType next to Metric when mentioned for better flow.
* Added text to Applicability to address comments on mailing list regarding gateway
behavior and NHDP HELLO messages.
* Removed paragraph in AODVv2 Message Transmission section regarding TTL.
* Added reference where precursors are mentioned in route table entry.
* Added text to bidirectionality explanation regarding NHDP HELLO messages and lower
layer triggers.
* Clarified blacklist removal with SHOULD rather than MAY.
* Removed pseudo-code from section on evaluating incoming routing information.
* Clarified rules for expunging route entries on memory-constrained devices.
* Clarified the use of exponential backoff for route discovery attempts.
* Small updates to message sections. Removed steps about checking if neighbors.
* Renamed [](#RFC5444) parser to multiplexer in Section 10.
* Removed "optional feature" to include multiple addresses in RERR.
* Removed MetricType from the Message TLV Type Specification.
* Updated Security Considerations.
* Added reference to RFC 7182.
* Small updates to message algorithms, including moving MetricType from Message TLV 
to the Metric TLV in the Address Block TLV Block, and only generating RERR if an Active 
route was made Invalid.



## Changes between revisions 6 and 7
This section lists the changes since AODVv2 revision ...-06.txt

* Added Victoria Mercieca as co-author.
* Reorganized protocol message descriptions into major subsections for each protocol 
message.  For protocol messages, organized processing into Generation, Reception, and
Regeneration subsections.
* Separated RREQ and RREP message processing description into separate major
subsection which had previously been combined into RteMsg description.
* Enlarged RREQ Table function to include similar processing for optional flooded RREP 
messages.  The table name has been correspondingly been changed to be the Table for 
Multicast RteMsgs.
* Moved sections for Multiple Interfaces and AODVv2 Control Message Generation Limits to 
be major subsections of the AODVv2 Protocol Operations section.
* Reorganized the protocol message processing steps into the subsections
as previously described, adopting a more step-by-step presentation.
* Coalesced the router states Broken and Expired into a new combined state
named the Invalid state.  No changes in processing are required for this.
* Merged the sections describing Next-hop Router Adjacency Monitoring and Blacklists.
* Specified that routes created during Route Discovery are marked as Idle routes.  If they 
are used for carrying data they become Active routes.
* Added Route.LastSeqNumUpdate information to route table, so that route activity and 
sequence number validity can be tracked separately. An active route can still forward 
traffic even if the sequence number has not been refreshed within MAX_SEQNUM_LIFETIME.
* Mandated implementation of RREP_Ack as response to AckReq Message TLV in RREP messages.  
Added field to RREP_Ack to ensure correspondence to the correct AckReq message.
* Added explanations for what happens if protocol constants are given different values on 
different AODVv2 routers.
* Specified that AODVv2 implementations are free to choose their own
heuristics for reducing multicast overhead, including RFC 6621.
* Added appendix to identify AODVv2 requirements from OS implementation of IP and ICMP.
* Deleted appendix showing example [](#RFC5444) packet formats.
* Clarification on the use of RFC 5497 VALIDITY_TIME.
* In Terminology, deleted superfluous definitions, added missing definitions.
* Numerous editorial improvements and clarifications.

## Changes between revisions 5 and 6
This section lists the changes between AODVv2 revisions ...-05.txt
and ...-06.txt.

* Added Lotte Steenbrink as co-author.
* Reorganized section on Metrics to improve readability by putting specific topics into 
subsections.
* Introduced concept of data element, which is used to clarify the method of enabling [](#RFC5444) 
representation for AODVv2 data elements.  A list of Data Elements was introduced in 
section 3, which provides a better understanding of their role than was previously supplied 
by the table of notational devices.
* Replaced instances of OrigNode by OrigAddr whenever the more specific meaning is appropriate.
Similarly for instances of other node versus address terminology.
* Introduced concepts of PrefixLengthList and MetricList in order to avoid use of index-based 
terminology such as OrigNdx and TargNdx.
* Added section 5, "AODVv2 Message Transmission", describing the intended interface to [](#RFC5444).
* Included within the main body of the specification the mandatory setting of the TLV flag 
thassingleindex for TLVs OrigSeqNum and TargSeqNum.
* Removed the Route.Timed state.  Created a new flag for route table entries known as 
Route.Timed.  This flag can be set when the route is in the active state.  Previous description 
would require that the route table entry be in two states at the same time, which seems to be 
misleading.  The new flag is used to clarify other specification details for Timed routes.
* Created table 3 to show the correspondence between AODVv2 data elements and [](#RFC5444) message 
components.
* Replaced "invalid" terminology by the more specific terms "broken" or "expired" where 
appropriate.
* Eliminated the instance of duplicate specification for inclusion of OrigNode (now, 
OrigAddr) in the message.
* Corrected the terminology to be Mid instead of Tail for the trailing address bits of 
OrigAddr and TargAddr for the example message formats in the appendices.
* Repaired remaining instances of phraseology that could be construed as indicating that 
AODV only supports a single network interface.
* Numerous editorial improvements and clarifications.


## Changes between revisions 4 and 5
This section lists the changes between AODVv2 revisions ...-04.txt
and ...-05.txt.

* Normative text moved out of definitions into the relevant section of the body of the 
specification.
* Editorial improvements and improvements to consistent terminology were made.  Replaced 
"retransmit" by the slightly more accurate term "regenerate".
* Issues were resolved as discussed on the mailing list.
* Changed definition of LoopFree as suggested by Kedar Namjoshi and Richard Trefler to avoid 
the failure condition that they have described. In order to make understanding easier, 
replaced abstract parameters R1 by RteMsg and R2 by Route to reduce the level of abstraction 
when the function LoopFree is discussed.
* Added text to clarify that different metrics may have different data types and different 
ranges of acceptable values.
* Added text to section "RteMsg Structure" to emphasize the proper use of [](#RFC5444).
* Included within the main body of the specification the mandatory setting of the TLV flag 
thassingleindex for TLVs OrigSeqNum and TargSeqNum.
* Made more extensive use of the AdvRte terminology, in order to better distinguish 
between the incoming RREQ or RREP message (i.e., RteMsg) versus the route advertised by 
the RteMsg (i.e., AdvRte).


## Changes between revisions 3 and 4
This section lists the changes between AODVv2 revisions ...-03.txt
and ...-04.txt.

* An appendix was added to exhibit algorithmic code for implementation of AODVv2 functions.
* Numerous editorial improvements and improvements to consistent terminology were made. 
Terminology related to prefix lengths was made consistent.  Some items listed in 
"Notational Conventions" were no longer used, and so deleted.
* Issues were resolved as discussed on the mailing list.
* Appropriate instances of "may" were changed to "MAY".
* Definition inserted for "upstream".
* Route.Precursors included as an \*optional\* route table field
* Reworded text to avoid use of "relevant".
* Deleted references to "DestOnly" flag.
* Refined statements about MetricType TLV to allow for omission when MetricType == HopCount.
* Bulletized list in section 8.1
* ENABLE_IDLE_UNREACHABLE renamed to be ENABLE_IDLE_IN_RERR
* Transmission and subscription to LL-MANET-Routers converted to MUST from SHOULD.


## Changes between revisions 2 and 3
 This section lists the changes between AODVv2 revisions ...-02.txt
and ...-03.txt.

* The "Added Node" feature was removed.  This feature was intended to enable additional 
routing information to be carried within a RREQ or a RREP message, thus increasing the
amount of topological information available to nodes along a routing path.  However, 
enlarging the packet size to include information which might never be used can increase 
congestion of the wireless medium.  The feature can be included as an optional feature 
at a later date when better algorithms are understood for determining when the inclusion 
of additional routing information might be worthwhile.
* Numerous editorial improvements and improvements to consistent terminology were made. 
Instances of OrigNodeNdx and TargNodeNdx were replaced by OrigNdx and TargNdx, to be 
consistent with the terminology shown in [](#conventions).
* Example RREQ and RREP message formats shown in the Appendices were changed to use 
OrigSeqNum and TargSeqNum message TLVs instead of using the SeqNum message TLV.
* Inclusion of the OrigNode's SeqNum in the RREP message is not specified.  The processing 
rules for the OrigNode's SeqNum were incompletely specified in previous versions of the 
draft, and very little benefit is foreseen for including that information, since reverse 
path forwarding is used for the RREP.
* Additional acknowledgements were included, and contributors names were alphabetized.
* Definitions in the Terminology section capitalize the term to be defined.
* Uncited bibliographic entries deleted.
* Ancient "Changes" sections were deleted.
-->